---
layout: about
title: About Techscursion
---

So, you're a bit confused about what's going on. Perhaps you aren't,
but for some reason clicked on the *about* link in the footer of the
page. Or maybe, just maybe, you ended up here after searching for
*Ladders* on [Google](http://google.com/search?q=ladders). <del
markdown="1">Prepare to enter… [*the Scary
Door*](http://theinfosphere.org/The_Scary_Door).</del> Techscursion
is, obviously, a *portmanteau*, obviously, of *technology* and
*excursion*. Imagine me here imitating the [Martians on Sesame
Street](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KTc3PsW5ghQ).

> Blah blah blah. get to the point!

Techscursion is an archive of articles – well, [only one at
writing](2011/11/turning-callbacks-inside-out) – on programming. It's
also a manufactured excuse to go ultra-minimal on style. It's also a
place where I plan to push myself to <del>vote</del> launch early,
launch often, go all
[MVP](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_viable_product) and
actually just write shit. Hah, the irony. After writing the preceeding
paragraphs I've spent an hour dicking around with the site's CSS. Time
to [push](http://github.com/bodhi/bodhi.github.com).

Techscursion is written by me, Bodhi Philpot. I'm a software developer
working mostly in the echo-chamber of web application development. I
work for [The Plant](http://theplant.jp), [have a neglected… er…
creative outlet over at Keshiki](http://keshiki.net), I tweet
([@bodhi](http://twitter.com/bodhi)), and am not really responsible
for a cat who may or may not be named *TB*. Oddly enough, I'm also a
big fan of the Drum & Bass DJ
[Teebee](http://www.last.fm/music/Teebee).
(whoa. [Last.fm](http://last.fm)?)

Please excuse the arbitrary nature of the above. I disengaged my
professional filter, and things kind of fall out when that
happens. Also, please remind me to get the typographic ornament that
is supposed to go here ↓