---
title: "Starting with Sudoku"
layout: default
---

I've had an idea for a while to use
[Sudoku](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sudoku) as a playground to
explore Computer Science™. And what better way to start than by
documenting a quick crappy implementation of a Sudoku solver?

## tl;dr

[Here](/sudoku/v1/)'s a thrown-together version. Click *solve*, and it
will iterate until there are no more changes. It doesn't actually
understand that it's solved the puzzle, it just gives up because it
can't find any more "moves" to make.

## Basic Structure

The code is split into 3 parts:

1. The *Game*, stored as a single flat list of *cells*. A *cell* is a
*value* and a list of *potential* values. The *value* is the number
that you'd write into a pen-and-paper Sudoku game. The list of
*potential* values is the numbers that the solver has decided *could*
go into this cell, based on what it's figured out so far.

   Each cell starts with a *potential* list of 1 through 9, since we
   start off *green-field*!

2. The viewer. This is basically just a bunch of
[React](http://facebook.github.io/react/) views that put together a
HTML table of either a cell's *value* or all of the *potential
values*.

3. The solver. In my initial garbage version, if you squint, you can
make out 3 parts:

   Functions that examine a structure to either eliminate (`reduce`),
   or *infer* possible values based on other row/column/*block* values
   and possible values;

   Transformers that rearrange the list of cells to make
   reduction/inference simpler;

   And the harness that iterates through the reduction/inference
   functions until it notices that no progress has been made.

For the rest of this excursion, I'm going to focus on the solver
functions, with a bit of dabbling in the game structure.

## Solving

We have two basic operations, *reducing* the possibilities, and
*inferring* values. We can do both actions on *rows*, *columns* and
*blocks* – by *block* I'm referring to the 3x3 subsets of the puzzle –
resulting in 6 possible actions.

The structure of the game is a single list, where each set of 9
numbers represents a row, and we can mark unfilled cells with `null`,
so in a reduced 3x3 puzzle `[null, 3, null, 4, null, 5, null, null, 2]` would represent:

<style>
  table.game { border-collapse: collapse; margin: 15px 0; }
  table.game td { border: 1px solid #CCC; width: 33px; height: 33px; text-align: center }
</style>

<table class="game">
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>3</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4</td>
<td></td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
</table>

So to do actions, we extract *rows*, *columns* or *blocks*, and then *reduce* or *infer*…


## Reduction

How do we reduce a row? First, we need to extract rows out of the
list. We just group the items in sets of 3 in this example, 9 in the
real puzzle.

Once we have the row data, reduction is simply collecting the *values*
of each cell in the row:

{% highlight javascript %}
values = block.map(function(cell) {
     return cell.value;
}).filter(function(val) { return !!val });
{% endhighlight %}

 then removing these values from the *possible* values of all other
cells (with a short-circuit for when the cell already has a value):

{% highlight javascript %}
return block.map(function(cell) {
    var possible = !!cell.value ? [] : cell.possible.filter(function(val) { return values.indexOf(val) == -1  });
    return {
       value: cell.value,
       possible: possible
    };
});
{% endhighlight %}

With a row of

<table class="game">
<tr>
<td>1</td>
<td class="possible"><del>1</del> 2 <del>3</del> 4 5 6 <del>7</del> 8 9</td>
<td class="possible"><del>1</del> 2 <del>3</del> 4 5 6 <del>7</del> 8 9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>3</td>
<td class="possible"><del>1</del> 2 <del>3</del> 4 5 6 <del>7</del> 8 9</td>
<td class="possible"><del>1</del> 2 <del>3</del> 4 5 6 <del>7</del> 8 9</td>
<td class="possible"><del>1</del> 2 <del>3</del> 4 5 6 <del>7</del> 8 9</td>
<td class="possible"><del>1</del> 2 <del>3</del> 4 5 6 <del>7</del> 8 9</td>
</tr>
</table>

<aside style="text-align: center;" markdown="1">
This is the first row of the example puzzle.
</aside>

We can see that the *values* in the row are {1,7,3}. None of the cells
in this row can have 1, 3 or 7 in their set of *possible* values, so
we can remove them from the *possible* list of values of each cell.

Considering *values* and *possible* values separately like this makes
it simpler, as we don't have to remember *which cell* holds *which
value*.

Reducing every row is simply repeating the above process across each
row.

### `reduceColumns()`

Naively, we could implement `reduceColumns()` by collecting every 9th
element of the list, then performing a similar action to `reduceRow()`
above. But consider that if we
[transpose](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transpose) the whole puzzle,
rows become columns, and columns become rows!

<table>
<tr>
<td>
   <table class="game">
   <tr>
   <td></td>
   <td>3</td>
   <td></td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
   <td>4</td>
   <td></td>
   <td>5</td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
   <td></td>
   <td></td>
   <td>2</td>
   </tr>
   </table>
</td>
<td style="text-align: center; padding: 0 5px;">
→
</td>
<td>
    <table class="game">
    <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>3</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>2</td>
    </tr>
    </table>
</td>
</tr>
</table>

And we already know how to, er, `reduceRows()`… So given `reduceRows()`
and `transpose()` we can trivially implement `reduceColumns()` as
`transpose(reduceRows(transpose(game)))`.

### `reduceBlocks()`

I puzzled on this for a while, trying to come up with a smart-ass
[golf shot](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_golf) to implement this
in the same vein as column reduction, and stared at this for a while:

<style>
  .block-a { background: #CCF; }
  .block-b { background: #FCF; }
  .block-c { background: #CFF; }
  .block-d { background: #FFC; }
</style>

<table>
<tr>
<td>
   <table class="game">
   <tr>
   <td class="block-a">1</td>
   <td class="block-a">2</td>
   <td class="block-b">5</td>
   <td class="block-b">6</td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
   <td class="block-a">3</td>
   <td class="block-a">4</td>
   <td class="block-b">7</td>
   <td class="block-b">8</td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
   <td class="block-c">9</td>
   <td class="block-c">10</td>
   <td class="block-d">13</td>
   <td class="block-d">14</td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
   <td class="block-c">11</td>
   <td class="block-c">12</td>
   <td class="block-d">15</td>
   <td class="block-d">16</td>
   </tr>
   </table>
</td>
<td style="text-align: center; padding: 0 5px;">
→
</td>
<td>
   <table class="game">
   <tr>
   <td class="block-a">1</td>
   <td class="block-a">2</td>
   <td class="block-a">3</td>
   <td class="block-a">4</td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
   <td class="block-b">5</td>
   <td class="block-b">6</td>
   <td class="block-b">7</td>
   <td class="block-b">8</td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
   <td class="block-c">9</td>
   <td class="block-c">10</td>
   <td class="block-c">11</td>
   <td class="block-c">12</td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
   <td class="block-d">13</td>
   <td class="block-d">14</td>
   <td class="block-d">15</td>
   <td class="block-d">16</td>
   </tr>
   </table>
</td>
</tr>
</table>

**Somehow**, I came up with this:

{% highlight javascript %}
function toRows(blocks, blockLength, rowLength) {
     var blockRows = inGroupsOf(blocks, blockLength * rowLength);
     linearRows = blockRows.map(function(blockRow) {
       return flatten(transpose(inGroupsOf(inGroupsOf(inGroupsOf(blockRow, blockLength), rowLength)[0], blockLength)));
     });
     return flatten(linearRows);
}
{% endhighlight %}

and I have *no idea* how this actually works, even only a few days
after writing it. I'm going to hand-wave and leave the explanation to
another article, but suffice it to say, this works **and** it's
reversible! It effectively acts as `transpose()` for swapping between
*blocks* and *rows*. Given this, `reduceBlocks()` is trivially the
same as `reduceColumns()`: `toRows(reduceRows(toRows(game)))`.

## "Inference"

The inference step is more involved than reduction. Here's the code for it, we'll break it down in a moment:

{% highlight javascript %}
function infer(rows) {
     var newRows = rows.map(function(row) {
     return row.map(function(cell) {
        var newCell = {
           value: cell.value,
           possible: cell.possible
        }
        if (!!cell.value) return newCell;
     
        var onlyHere = cell.possible.reduce(function(memo, val) {
          if (row.every(function(otherCell) {
              return (otherCell.value != val && otherCell.possible.indexOf(val) == -1) || otherCell === cell
            })) {
            memo.push(val);
          }
          return memo;
        }, []);

        if (onlyHere.length > 1) {
           // do something about it.
        } else if (onlyHere.length == 1) {
           return {
             value: onlyHere[0],
             possible: []
           }
        } else {
           return newCell;
        }
     });
    });
    return newRows;
}
{% endhighlight %}

<aside markdown="1">
We'll come back and clean this up later. Also, please excuse the
indentation, I wrote it in a HTML file in a `<script>` tag, and thus
Emacs won't indent it properly. Also, I can be lazy.
</aside>

Ignoring the woeful current state of the implementation, what this function does for each row/column/block is…

Duplicate the cell:

{% highlight javascript %}
var newCell = {
   value: cell.value,
   possible: cell.possible
}
{% endhighlight %}

… Give up immediately if the cell already has a value (since there's no point inferring anything):

{% highlight javascript %}
if (!!cell.value) return newCell;
{% endhighlight %}

… Determine which of the possible values for this cell are *only*
possible in this cell (when comparing with the rest of the
row/column/block):

{% highlight javascript %}
var onlyHere = cell.possible.reduce(function(memo, val) {
  if (row.every(function(otherCell) {
      return (otherCell.value != val && otherCell.possible.indexOf(val) == -1) || otherCell === cell
    })) {
    memo.push(val);
  }
  return memo;
}, []);
{% endhighlight %}

… Then, if there's a value that can *only* be in this cell, go with it!

{% highlight javascript %}
if (onlyHere.length > 1) {
   // do something about it.
} else if (onlyHere.length == 1) {
   return {
     value: onlyHere[0],
     possible: []
   }
} else {
   return newCell;
}
{% endhighlight %}

To visualise the core of the action, lets start with the following row from the demonstration puzzle. After a few rounds of working, we have (small numbers are potential values):

<style>
  table.game td.possible {
    font-size: 9px;
    padding: 5px;
    width: 23px;
    color: #999;
  }

  table.game td.possible del {
    color: #F00;
  }
</style>

<table class="game">
<tr>
<td>8</td>
<td class="possible block-b">2 7</td>
<td class="possible">2 3 6</td>
<td class="possible">1 4 6</td>
<td>5</td>
<td class="possible">1 4 6</td>
<td class="possible">1 2</td>
<td class="possible">1 2 3 4 6</td>
<td>9</td>
</tr>
</table>

Let's examine cell 2, second from left. It has two *potential* values,
**2** and **7**. **2** can be in cells 3, 7 and 8; but **7** can
*only* be in cell 2. Therefore, cell 2 *must* be **7**:

<table class="game">
<tr>
<td>8</td>
<td class="block-b" style="color: red;">7</td>
<td class="possible">2 3 6</td>
<td class="possible">1 4 6</td>
<td>5</td>
<td class="possible">1 4 6</td>
<td class="possible">1 2</td>
<td class="possible">1 2 3 4 6</td>
<td>9</td>
</tr>
</table>

---

Using the same transforms as we used for *reduction*, we can do this
inference for *columns* and *blocks* too.

## Holding It All Together with Duct Tape and String.

Given the actions above, and a way to compare the world after each
step, we can simply iterate through our actions

1. Reduce rows
2. Reduce columns
3. Reduce blocks
4. Infer rows
5. Infer columns
6. Infer blocks

until we notice that there has been no change for a complete cycle. We
can't stop after the first action that does nothing, as it's possible
that we need to infer values for a row, before we can reduce values in
a column.

In my implementation, detecting lack of change is simple because, for
visualisation purposes, I keep track of what *possiblities* are
removed by each action. This visualisation is disabled in the version
linked to above though, as it just attempts to solve the puzzle in one run
of the Javascript event loop.

## What's Missing?

For some puzzles, the inference and reduction steps are not enough to
find a solution. We'd get stuck before arriving at a solution, and
need to pick an arbitrary unfilled cell, make a *guess* at a value,
and then verify if this results in a solution. One way of doing this
is implementing a tree search, where each possible value for a cell
represents a child node to explore.
